feat(sc): support router replay with TQ (#3378)
NVIDIA-NeMo/RL: docs/guides/router-replay.md

The fallback is intentionally route-local: it does not disable Router Replay for
the whole batch or sample.

When fallback is used, the vLLM worker emits a `R3 router replay fallback:` warning
to the run log naming the affected sample count and missing token-route count.
Fallback should normally be absent or rare; frequent warnings mean a meaningful
share of token routes used Megatron's normal router instead of replay.

The generation backend also computes

> `r3/routed_experts_fallback_token_route_fraction`, but no training loop currently

Reviewer: > no training loop currently forwards it to the metric logger

Is that as expected?

`_add_r3_fallback_metrics` writes into the inner `gen_metrics`. We should be able to trace it using `rollout_metrics`.

Author: SC does not seem to propagate `rollout_metrics` through TQ.

Reviewer 2: @ZhiyuLi-Nvidia @zyzhou5 — I dug into this one and filed it so it doesn't get lost: https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/issues/2625#issuecomment-5127202378

Short version: @zyzhou5's answer is right, and it turns out there are two stacked gaps rather than one.

1. **SC drops `rollout_metrics` wholesale**, not just the R3 keys — `PromptGroupRecord.rollout_metrics` is populated but never read by `record_to_train_batch`, so it dies at the TQ boundary. Both legacy drivers do log it (`grpo.py:2787` sync, `grpo.py:4659` async), so this is an SC-only gap and matches the existing TODO at `single_controller.py:552-556`.
2. **The `r3/*` counters were never in `rollout_metrics` on any path** — `_add_r3_fallback_metrics` writes them into a local `gen_metrics` dict that both legacy call sites drop on the floor. So @ZhiyuLi-Nvidia, tracing via `rollout_metrics` wouldn't have worked even on the legacy path today; and on SC `_add_r3_fallback_metrics` isn't called at all.

Which means fixing (1) alone still wouldn't surface the fallback fraction — it needs both. Nothing to change in this PR; the docs caveat @zyzhou5 added is accurate as written. Filed against #2625 rather than here since (1) is much broader than R3.

The fallback is intentionally route-local: it does not disable Router Replay for
the whole batch or sample.

When fallback is used, the vLLM worker emits a `R3 router replay fallback:` warning
to the run log naming the affected sample count and missing token-route count.
Fallback should normally be absent or rare; frequent warnings mean a meaningful
share of token routes used Megatron's normal router instead of replay.

> The generation backend also computes
> `r3/routed_experts_fallback_token_route_fraction`, but no training loop currently
> forwards it to the metric logger, so do not rely on it in dashboards or gates.

Reviewer 2: [`docs/guides/router-replay.md:125-127`](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/blob/893c9faae26ee6db65a3626f07fa7478b1009233/docs/guides/router-replay.md#L125-L127)

@ZhiyuLi-Nvidia — following up on your question here: **@zyzhou5's answer is correct, and if anything the doc line understates it.** I traced it end to end and there's nothing to fix, but three details seem worth recording since this is the one paragraph telling people not to trust the metric:

1. **It's dropped on *every* path, not just SC.** [`_add_r3_fallback_metrics`](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/blob/893c9faae26ee6db65a3626f07fa7478b1009233/nemo_rl/experience/rollouts.py#L64-L87) is called at exactly two sites — [rollouts.py:370](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/blob/893c9faae26ee6db65a3626f07fa7478b1009233/nemo_rl/experience/rollouts.py#L370) (legacy sync) and [rollouts.py:511](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/blob/893c9faae26ee6db65a3626f07fa7478b1009233/nemo_rl/experience/rollouts.py#L511) (legacy async). Both callers pop only `_response_truncated` ([L768](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/blob/893c9faae26ee6db65a3626f07fa7478b1009233/nemo_rl/experience/rollouts.py#L768)) and `gen_leader_worker_idx` ([L1059-1072](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/blob/893c9faae26ee6db65a3626f07fa7478b1009233/nemo_rl/experience/rollouts.py#L1059-L1072)) and let the dict fall out of scope; neither the sync [`rollout_metrics`](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/blob/893c9faae26ee6db65a3626f07fa7478b1009233/nemo_rl/experience/rollouts.py#L890) nor the async [`sample_metrics`](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/blob/893c9faae26ee6db65a3626f07fa7478b1009233/nemo_rl/experience/rollouts.py#L1171) ever merges `gen_metrics`. Nothing repo-wide consumes the `r3/*` keys.
2. **On SC it isn't even computed.** `RolloutManager` never goes through `generate_responses*`; [`_generate_response` builds `gen_metrics` from scratch](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/blob/893c9faae26ee6db65a3626f07fa7478b1009233/nemo_rl/experience/rollout_manager.py#L329-L341) and never calls `_add_r3_fallback_metrics`. So closing this on SC is two changes, not one.
3. **Your `rollout_metrics` hypothesis is right about the second one.** [`TQReplayBuffer.commit` ships only `record_to_train_batch(record, ...)`](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/blob/893c9faae26ee6db65a3626f07fa7478b1009233/nemo_rl/algorithms/async_utils/replay_buffer.py#L724), and that function never reads `record.rollout_metrics` ([payload.py:84-95](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/blob/893c9faae26ee6db65a3626f07fa7478b1009233/nemo_rl/experience/payload.py#L84-L95)) — matching the standing TODO at [single_controller.py:552-556](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/blob/893c9faae26ee6db65a3626f07fa7478b1009233/nemo_rl/algorithms/single_controller.py#L552-L556), which already lists `rollout_metrics`.

Filed against the SC cleanup tracking issue so it isn't lost: https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/RL/issues/2625#issuecomment-5127202378 (it turned out to be broader than R3 — SC drops `rollout_metrics` wholesale, not just the `r3/*` keys). Nothing to change in this PR.

**Action (optional, docs-only):** the sentence is accurate; this only makes point 2 explicit for an SC reader.

```suggestion
The legacy (non-Single-Controller) rollout paths also compute
`r3/routed_experts_fallback_token_route_fraction`, but no training loop currently
forwards it to the metric logger, and the Single Controller path does not compute
it at all — so do not rely on it in dashboards or gates.
```
